# Time & Place

Najan has four cases for characterizing time and place. The **locative** (ʟᴏᴄ)
particle {lɪ} marks being or occurring at or within a point or region of space
or time. The **lative** (ʟᴀᴛ) {we} indicates direction to or into a point or
region, while its inverse, the **ablative** (ᴀʙʟ) {xu}, indicates from, away
from, or out of. Finally, the **perlative** (ᴘᴇʀ) {zi} indicates movement
(again, in space or time) through, throughout, or across. Each of these
prepositions is inclusive: {we} includes the destination; {xu} includes the
origin; and {zi} includes the entirety of the path, region, or duration.

The complements of these case prepositions may be explicit places or times, but
they could also be something else, such as a person or event. In that case, the
argument refers to the spatio-temporal location of that object; e.g. {lɪ ko}
(literally _at me_) means _at my time and place_.

English supplies a plethora of prepositions for describing spatio-temporal
relations. For instance, a chair may be at, on, under, or beside a table. In
Najan, each of these relations would use the locative case: {za lɪ za cats qa
muð dan}, _a chair at a table_.

The case marker alone is often sufficient in context to convey the full
relationship, but to add clarity or expressiveness, one can replace the object
of the case preposition with a more specific expression. For example, since the
lative case particle {we} (_to_) is always inclusive of the specified
destination, {we gi vatθ} (_to the end_) means that the expression holds true up
to and including the end. To convey that the expression held true up to (but not
necessarily including) some time before the end, one could say {we za qa gi vatθ
kle}, lit. _to a past [time] of the end_.
